1.On the second excersise, I've learned that this first column after using ls -l command tells me about access level I and other users have.
The practical way  to use this knowledge is rather obvious as it allows to limit or extended access to directories or files via the CHMOD(change mode) command.
I will list meaning of each letter(bit) below as they are crucial to understaing the use of this command:
d - directory - self-explainatory
l - link - this one is a bit tricky because it works similar to shortcuts in windows, if i were to access the file that is listed as "link" in reality i would be modifying the file that it is linked to somewhere on the hard drive. Quite easy to understand but hard to explain.
r -  read
w - write/save
x - EXECUTE/run - means not only that I can just enter a directory but also allows me to see what's inside
first 3 bits/letters(after the first letter like d or l) apply to the main user
next 3 bits apply to the users in the group 
And the other 3 set access level for all other users.

So if we use an example:
drwxrwxr-- - this means that I and other users in my group have full access to this directory but others can only read what is inside of it without the ability to execute or save(or delete) any file

2.HOW TO USE CHMOD?
a)The symbolic notation consists of three components:

chmod [references][operator][modes] <file>

REFERENCES consists of a combination of four letters:
u - user's file group
g - other users in the user's group
o - other users NOT in the user's group
a - all users
If the references component is omitted, it defaults to all users, but only permissions allowed by the "umask"( more on that later) are modified
OPERATOR
"+" - causes specified bit to be added to the existing file
"-" - causes specified bit to be removed
"=" - causes specified bit to be added but all others are REMOVED -  CHMOD o=r <file> means that other users can only read a file
MODES
See letters r w x above, that's what mode is
I've found some more modes on the internet(unix.stackexchange) like
X -
s -
t -
But I've no idea what their purpose is, especially as the first rwx letters seem to cover everything I would need to grant or remove access to a file.

EXAMPLE
CHMOD a+rwx kat1 - will grant everyone access and the ability to read nad modify files in kat1 directory

THING TO REMEMBER:
If the file has only the r bit, then if I were to use ls -l command i wouldn't be able to see any details in specified directory apart from file names
To remove access for everyone to a file or directory use the following command: a=-

b) Apart from the symbolic notation exist octal notation which I believe is a bit easier to use, even if for the simple fact that it is faster

TABLE OF OCTAL NUMBERS:
0 - 000 ---
1 - 001 --x
2 - 010 -w-
3 - 011 -wx
4 - 100 r--
5 - 101 r-x
6 - 110 rw-
7 - 111 rwx
3. UMASK(user mask)
The base UMASK is set to 022, it means that the main user has the ability to do everything with a file but others can only view and read it.
Setting an umask is a bit different than setting chmod as contrary to it we remove bits, for example:
UMASK 777 will mean that newly created file will be unreadable, unwritable and unexecutable because all bits will be set to 0
UMASK 000 will allow every user to do anything they want with a file.

NOTE TO SELF
Newly created files will have only rw bits because there is nothing to execute, only when they contain something they executed.

4.Various things
You can forward things by using > command, for example:
echo "blep" > txtfile
will add blep to txtfile
chmod a=0 .. will remove your access to the parent folder
tail - tail command shows last ten lines of a text file unless modified - certainly faster than using vim
which <name> - checks if a <name> is installed 
MKDIR -P file1/file2 - quite useful command as it creates any missing directories for each argument, setting their file permission bits to the umask modified by "u+wx" all the while ignoring existing file directories and not changing their file permission bits.

ARCHEOTECH BROWSERS(no ads!)
1)check if your browser is installed by using"which"command, currently available on my vm are: w3m, links, link2, lynx
2)if it's not installed then simply install it using command sudo apt-get -y install <filename>
3) Now that it is installed just input "links2" in the command prompt or you can input links2 -g if you want it to look a bit better
4)when it starts just click g and input browser name with http:// or https://
5)it looks like dwarf fortress
6)quit using q

TO DO:
excersises from the szuflandia page when it starts working again
check what those inodes are and what is their pracrical use


Questions:
1. Are there any others bits/letters other than d or l? If so, what is their meaning?
2 . What does the second column with the numbers mean after using ls -la command? 

